Everything Else
===============

`MILITARY LAW 379 <#military-law>`__

`Overview of the Military Justice System
379 <#overview-of-the-military-justice-system>`__

`Charge Procedures 384 <#_Toc398041322>`__

`Common Military Offences 389 <#common-military-offences>`__

`ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 394 <#alternative-dispute-resolution>`__

`Arbitration 394 <#_Toc398041332>`__

`Mediation 395 <#_Toc398041333>`__

`Adjudication 395 <#_Toc398041334>`__

`Alternative Dispute Resolution in Singapore 397 <#_Toc398041336>`__

`THE TRAFFIC COURT 403 <#the-traffic-court>`__

`Traffic offences without any offer of composition
403 <#traffic-offences-without-any-offer-of-composition>`__

`Minor traffic offences with an offer of composition
403 <#minor-traffic-offences-with-an-offer-of-composition>`__

MILITARY LAW
============

Overview of the Military Justice System
---------------------------------------

The Singapore Armed Forces (“SAF”) is expected to treat every member of
its service personnel fairly and equally under the military justice
system, regardless of race, rank or vocation. [289]_

The military justice system is based on the SAF Act (Cap 295). All
servicemen/women are subjected to the SAF Act, SAF Regulations and
orders of whatever form issued pursuant to them. While discipline is
paramount in the military, not all offences committed by SAF
servicemen/women are dealt with by formal investigations and charges.
Offenders can be dealt with by way of informal or formal punishment
systems. [290]_

Informal Punishment System [291]_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Commanders are empowered to mete out informal punishments or
administrative measures like extra duties or weekend confinement to
servicemen who have committed minor disciplinary breaches, such as being
late, sluggish, or improperly dressed.

Unlike with formal punishment, there will be no records of informal
punishment beyond the unit’s own administration, thus such records will
not follow a Full-time National Serviceman (“NSF”) upon leaving his unit
on his Operationally-Ready Date (“ORD”).

Formal Punishment System
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the offence that a serviceman/woman has committed is of a more
serious nature, he/she may be formally dealt with by his disciplinary
officer by way of a summary trial, or brought before a subordinate
military court (more commonly known as the General Court
Martial). [292]_ Depending on the rank of the serviceman/woman being
charged, he/she may be brought before a junior or senior disciplinary
officer to be charged at summary trial. The presiding officer may refer
the case to a higher authority at his/her discretion.

    **1. Summary trial**

    The offences that can be dealt with by summary trial are essentially
    military offences, such as absence without leave, non-compliance
    with lawful orders, and insubordination. [293]_

    Depending on the rank of the serviceman/woman in question, and the
    type of the disciplinary body hearing the case, the possible
    sentences that may be imposed can vary, and may include fines or
    detention. [294]_

    A summary trial lacks certain elements of a normal trial, most
    notably the absence of any requirement that the disciplinary officer
    abides by the rules of evidence. [295]_ Procedurally, it gives the
    disciplinary officer a lot of discretion in carrying out the trial
    in a manner that he/she deems appropriate or expedient for the
    disposal of the charge in conducting the trial.

    However, the discretion conferred is not a blank cheque; the summary
    trial is carried out in accordance with relevant SAF regulations,
    and the records of the summary trial are sent to the office of the
    Director, Legal Services of the SAF to monitor the conduct of such
    trials. [296]_

    **2. General Court Martial**

    The General Court Martial (“GCM”) exists as a separate forum from
    that of the summary trial. Unlike the summary trial, the GCM deals
    with a wider range of offences, and can impose a wide range of
    punishments including imprisonment and discharge, on top of
    sentences like detention and fines. The GCM is also a more public
    and open forum, and its proceedings are conducted using similar
    legal rules and procedures as those used in a civilian criminal
    court. [297]_

    Generally, only serious offences investigated by the Military Police
    Command and referred to the office of the Director of Legal Services
    will result in the accused serviceman being charged in a GCM. In
    such a case, a military prosecutor will draw up a formal charge
    sheet and present it before the GCM. [298]_

    A serviceman that has been found guilty of an offence through a
    Summary Trial will be given an opportunity to elect to be heard in a
    GCM before he is convicted and punished. [299]_ However under the
    circumstances, if the punishment for the offence is a reprimand or a
    minor punishment, the disciplinary officer has the discretion to
    refuse this opportunity to the serviceman/woman. [300]_

    **Panel Court Martial & Judge Court Martial**\  [301]_

    GCMs can be further sub-divided into two categories: the Panel
    Courts Martial—consisting of a President and usually two other
    members, and the Judge Courts Martial—consisting of a single
    President only. The current practice is for military offences to be
    heard by Panel Courts Martial, while civil offences like misuse of
    drugs and penal code offences may be dealt with by a Judge Court
    Martial.

*
*\ Seeking Redress [302]_
-------------------------

There are numerous safeguards and avenues set out in the Military
Justice System for a serviceman/women to seek redress if he/she feels
unfairly treated or sentenced.

    **1. Informal Punishment**

    Generally a serviceman/woman who is dissatisfied with an informal
    punishment may request that a superior commander review the
    punishment, or request a formal disciplinary hearing.

    **2. Summary Trial**

    **Right to be tried by a General Court Martial / Subordinate
    Military Court**

    If a Serviceman/woman is faced with a summary trial, the
    Disciplinary officer who brought the charge will first try him/her.
    One the Disciplinary officer is satisfied of the available evidence
    that the Serviceman/woman is guilty, he/she is to give the accused a
    right to be tried by a General Court Martial. However the
    Disciplinary officer has the discretion to deny trial by General
    Court Martial if the punishment is a reprimand or minor punishment
    that doesn’t involve a fine, detention, imprisonment, deduction in
    rank or any other more serious penalty.

    If the Serviceman/woman choses to exercise their right to be tried
    by General Court Martial, the Disciplinary officer shall forward the
    charge sheet, record of evidence and such other particulars to the
    director. The Director shall:

-  Direct that a charge be submitted to the convening authority and a
   trail by General Court Martial shall proceed.

-  With the approval of the Armed Forces Council, direct that no action
   be taken against the accused either by way of Summary Trial or by a
   General Court Martial, thereby acquitting ehe Serviceman/Woman of the
   charge

    **Petition for Review**

    Alternatively, an aggrieved Serviceman/Woman may request that the
    Armed Forces Council or any other appropriate authority as delegated
    by the Council review his/her conviction or punishment imposed at
    the Summary Trial.

    **3. General Court Martial**

    General Court Martial and Field General Courts Martial are
    collectively referred to as “Subordinate Military Courts”.

**Representation**

    In the case of a General Court Martial, a Serviceman/woman may
    choose to be represented by a lawyer or an SAF Defending Officer if
    a Court Martial will hear his/her Case. Accepting the appointment of
    an SAF Defending Officer incurs no cost to the Serviceman, but the
    costs of a privately engaged lawyer must be borne by the
    Serviceman/woman.

    **Petition for Review and Appeal**

    At the end of the trial, a Serviceman/woman who is dissatisfied with
    the decision of the Court Martial may petition the Reviewing
    Authority (the Armed Forces Council or a Committee of its members)
    for a review of his/her case. The Serviceman/Woman can also appeal
    to the Military Court Of Appeal (“MCA”) for a reconsideration of
    his/her conviction, his /her sentence or both. All decisions of the
    MCA are final.

    **4. Military Court Of Appeal**

**Composition of the MCA**

    The MCA is the highest court in the Military Justice System. The
    MCA, when convened to hear an appeal, sits as a aanel of five
    members. Heading the MCA is a President appointed by the Chief
    Justice. By law, the President of the MCA must be a person qualified
    to be a Judge Of The Supreme Court. Four other members—two civilian
    members who are qualified Legal Practitioners with at least five
    years experience each, and two Senior Military Officers—constitute
    the rest of the MCA.

    **Use Of Civilian Legal Procedures**

    The General Court Martial and the MCA are tribunals headed by
    Presidents who are outside the SAF chain of command. The Presidents
    of these forums will hear the case impartially like any other
    civilian criminal case. The proceedings in the General Court Martial
    and the MCA are also heard in a public forum, and these military
    courts adopt many of the same legal procedures and safeguards as
    those used in civilian criminal courts. All Servicemen/women
    formally charged with offences can bring their cases to these
    forums.

Charge Procedure
----------------

Case Flow Outline
-----------------

Charges & Jurisdiction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**1. Accused servicemen/women under the rank of Warrant Officer**

Either a junior disciplinary officer or a senior disciplinary officer
can issue a charge and hold a summary trial. [303]_

-  A “junior disciplinary officer” is an officer or a warrant officer
   commanding a squadron, battery, company or equivalent
   sub-unit [304]_.

-  A “senior disciplinary officer” is an officer in command of a base or
   unit equivalent to a battalion or larger, usually the Commanding
   Officer of the serviceman/woman’s unit [305]_.

    The serviceman/woman may be able to elect to be tried by a General
    Court Martial (“GCM”) instead. (Refer to the previous section for
    details)

**2. Accused officers under the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel**

Only a superior commander who is at least 2 ranks above him can issue a
charge. [306]_

The superior commander can be an officer commanding a command or
formation, or designated as a superior commander for the purpose of
discipline by the Armed Forces Council. [307]_

Arrest
~~~~~~

“Arrest” includes both close arrest and open arrest. “Close Arrest”
means that the Serviceman/Woman is detained in a designated place (e.g.
detention barracks). “Open Arrest” means that he/she is still able to go
about his/her daily activities in the barracks/ship.

A Serviceman/Woman may be placed under arrest pending investigation.
During this time, he/she will be permitted access to counsel as long as
there is no prejudice to the investigative Process.

In general, a person will not be detained where the offence is not of a
serious nature. However, a person may be placed under close arrest if
he/she is likely to injure him/herself or others, suborn witnesses, has
been apprehended as being absent without leave (“Awol”), or under any
other circumstances where close arrest is deemed desirable.

*
*\ Bail
~~~~~~~

An accused person who has been detained may apply for bail, pending
investigation or appeal. [308]_ If he is successful in his application,
he will be released from detention, and entrusted to the custody of the
person who posted bail — the surety. [309]_ If the accused person
absconds, the surety is liable to forfeit the sum specified when the
bail is granted. [310]_

    **1. Application for bail**

To apply for bail, the accused must first have lodged a notice of appeal
to the Registrar of the Subordinate Military Courts. The court will then
commence a hearing of the bail application.

    **2. Surety and bond**

The accused must also have a surety who is willing to provide a bond as
a guarantee for the accused’s attendance in court.

    The court decides the value of the bond, [311]_ and the bond itself
    may take the form of an undertaking to pay, or even an actual cash
    deposit. Depending on the value of the bond, as well as the
    surrounding circumstances, a court may allow multiple sureties.

    **3. Considerations in granting bail**

Some considerations the court might take into account in granting bail
are:

-  The seriousness of the offence.

-  The severity of the punishment awarded by the GCM (in the case of an
   appeal).

-  Whether the sureties are satisfactory.

-  Previous imprisonment or detention of the accused;

-  Previous failures to appear in court;

-  Likelihood of recidivism if released on bail (particularly in AWOL
   cases); and

-  Where the accused is charged with offences of assault/offering
   violence/indecent conduct, so as to safeguard the public.

Legal Representation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A serviceman may choose to be defended either by privately engaged
counsel, or by an appointed Defending Officer. Defending Officers are
appointed, usually from within the unit, and may or may not be legally
trained.

Access to legal representation by a practitioner of the accused person’s
choice is guaranteed under the Constitution. [312]_ However, this
entitlement only arises after “a reasonable time” after arrest so as to
facilitate the investigative process. [313]_ What constitutes “a
reasonable time” is based on the circumstances of the case, [314]_ but
in general the onus is on the investigative authority to justify the
denial of access to counsel by explaining why it would be prejudicial to
the investigative process.

Requesting Reduction & Alteration Of Charges
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Representations are written memorandums to the prosecution, and are
written to persuade the prosecution to reduce the number of charges
brought against the serviceman. Representations may be written in the
same style as a mitigation plea, and are submitted well in advance of
the trial date. If you require more time to prepare for the trial (such
as for the purpose of interviewing the serviceman and writing
representations), you may request a postponement of the trial date.

Upon interviewing the accused serviceman/woman and informing him/her of
the charges, the Defending Officer/legal representative should note if
he/she would like to contest any of the charges, either because they
contain details which he/she feels are inaccurate, or if he/she is not
amenable to admitting to the charge at all. Representations can
therefore be made to the prosecution for the purpose of reducing or
altering the charges.

The Defending Officer/legal representative might want to make
representations to the prosecution especially in cases where there are
multiple charges drawn against the serviceman form a single incident, or
when the modification of a few particulars of the charge would make the
serviceman agreeable to admitting to it.

The prosecution may respond in a number of ways:

-  An agreement to withdraw a charge means that the charge will be stood
   down entirely

-  Taking a charge into consideration means that the court will not
   treat the charges individually during sentencing, but will take them
   into consideration in the judgment. This usually is conditional on
   the serviceman’s agreement to plead guilty to the charges to be taken
   into consideration.

-  Lastly, the prosecution may choose to continue with the charges, in
   which case the charges will be brought up during the trial.

Whether charges will be dropped, taken into consideration or proceeded
upon is entirely up to the discretion of the prosecutor.

Mitigation & Defence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

    **1. Mitigation**\  [315]_

Mitigation is adopted only when the accused has already pleaded guilty.
If a serviceman/woman pleads guilty, he/she essentially accepts full
admission to the charge(s) brought against him/her, and the GCM must
then decide on the appropriate sentence.

    Therefore, the main objective of a mitigating plea is to reduce the
    sentence by raising appropriate mitigating factors. These include
    previous good conduct, remorse and adverse family backgrounds.

    Besides mitigation based on existing charges, another avenue for
    reducing the overall sentence is to reduce the overall number of
    charges. This involves making representations to the prosecution.
    (Refer to Chapter 18.2.6)

    **2. Defence**

    If the accused pleads “not guilty”, the prosecution will then submit
    evidence to prove the charges. The accused may then submit a defence
    to rebut the allegations made by the prosecution. In general, a
    defence is more difficult to conduct than mitigation. Although it is
    possible for a serviceman/woman to represent him/herself, or to
    request a Defending Officer, most servicemen/women privately engage
    lawyers if they are contesting the charge.

Common Military Offences
------------------------

The following sub-chapter outlines peacetime offences in the SAF Act
(Cap. 295) that servicemen/women are more commonly convicted of and the
corresponding sentences for each offence.

General Conduct Offences

**Disobedience of general orders** (s 21): This is a catch-all provision
regarding the contravention or failure to comply with a lawful general
order which the serviceman/woman might have or ought to have known
about.

**•** Maximum sentence\ **:** **2 years** imprisonment

**Conduct to prejudice of good order or discipline** (s 25): This is
another catch-all provision regarding a serviceman whose conduct or
omission is considered to be to the prejudice of good order or
discipline.

**•** Maximum sentence\ **:** **12 months** imprisonment

**Malingering** (s 32): There are three forms of malingering:

(a) Falsely pretending to suffer from an illness.

(b) Deliberately injuingr oneself or any person, or causing oneself to
    be injured by any person, and doing so with the intent to render
    oneself or the other person to be rendered unfit for service.

(c) Doing anything to produce, prolong or aggravate any sickness with
    the intent to render or keep himself unfit for duty or service.

    • Maximum sentence: **12 months** imprisonment

**Intoxication** (s 33): This offence is applicable whether the
serviceman/woman was on duty or not when found to be intoxicated.

**•** Maximum sentence\ **: 6 months** imprisonment

**Possession, etc., of drugs** (s 34): Any person who possesses, smokes
or consumes any controlled drug is liable under this section. What is
considered a “controlled drug” is defined in any written law relating to
the misuse or control of drugs, such as the Misuse of Drugs Act (Cap.
185). A possible defence is that the serviceman/woman was authorised to
do so.

**•** Maximum sentence: **5 years** imprisonment

**Contempt** (s 48): This offence is applicable mainly to disobedience
of lawful judicial procedural orders, such as failing to comply with a
summons/order to attend as a witness at the Military Court of Appeal (s
48(1)(a)), or refusing to take an oath when required to do so (s
48(1)(b)).

    **•** Maximum sentence: **2 years imprisonment**, but if the court
    requires the offender to be tried summarily instead of at trial,
    then the maximum sentence is **21 days** imprisonment or a $50 fine

*
*\ Absence Without Leave

**Absence without leave** (s 22):

Absence without leave is commonly referred to as “AWOL” (Absent Without
Official Leave). Any serviceman/woman who is absent from where he/she is
lawfully required to be present is liable under this section. It is a
defence that the serviceman/woman was absent due to a result of
circumstances over which he/she had no control (s 22(2)).

**•** Maximum sentence: **2 years** imprisonment

**Desertion** (s 23):

Absence without leave escalates into the offence of desertion if the
serviceman/woman is not only absent from where he/she is lawfully
required to be present, but is also found to have intended to remain
permanently absent from duty without lawful authority when/after he/she
has failed to report to his place of duty (s 23(2)(b)).

**•** Maximum sentence: **10 years** imprisonment

Abuse & Excess of Authority

**Abuse of authority** (s 29): A serviceman/woman is liable under this
section if he/she knowingly exceeds his/her authority over a
subordinate.

• Maximum sentence: **2 years** imprisonment

**Personation and excess of authority** (s 30):

(a) When a serviceman/woman holds himself out to have a rank, status, or
assignment in the SAF, or who wears any military dress, insignia or
badge that he is not authorised to wear, is liable under s 30(1).

-  Maximum sentence: **12 months** imprisonment

(b) When a serviceman/woman who, without authority does any act while
holding him/herself out to have authority to do so, is liable under s
30(2).

• Maximum sentence: **2 years** imprisonment

Offences Against Persons & Property

**Endangering life or property** (s 41): Any serviceman/woman who does
an act that endangers life or property, and which causes or is likely to
cause injury to the person or property, is liable under this section.

    **•** Maximum sentence: **5 years** imprisonment for wilful acts
    (s 41(a)) and 3 years imprisonment for negligent acts (s 41(b))

**Damage to, and loss of, SAF property, etc.** (s 42):

Any serviceman/woman who wilfully damages or causes the loss of, or is
concerned in the wilful damage or loss of any SAF property or any
property belonging to a person subject to military law is liable under s
42(1). This includes acts of wilful neglect.

**•** Maximum sentence: **3 years** imprisonment

Any serviceman/woman who causes through a negligent act or omission any
damage to, or loss of, SAF property, or has committed a wilful or
negligent act or omission which is likely to cause damage to, or loss
of, SAF property, is liable under s 42(2).

**•** Maximum sentence: **2 years** imprisonment, or **3 years**
imprisonment if the property concerned consists of arms, or is an
aircraft, a vessel or a vehicle

**Unlawful arrest** (s 45):

Any serviceman/woman who either unlawfully holds a person in custody, or
does not comply with the regulations governing the placing of a person
in custody, is liable under this section.

**•** Maximum sentence: **2 years** imprisonment

Misappropriation & Misapplication of Property

**Dishonest misappropriation of SAF property** (s 43):

Any serviceman/woman is liable if he/she steals or dishonestly
misappropriates any SAF property, or:

(a) Is involved in the stealing of any SAF property (s 43(a)); or

(b) Receives any property belonging to the SAF or to a person subject to
military law while knowing that it was stolen or dishonestly
misappropriated (s 43(b))

    **•** Maximum sentence: **3 years** imprisonment, or **7 years**
    imprisonment if the property in question consisted of an aircraft, a
    vessel, or arms.

**Misapplication and waste of SAF property** (s 44):

Any serviceman/woman who misapplies or wastefully expends any SAF
property is liable under this section.

**•** Maximum sentence: **2 years** imprisonment

Abetments & Attempts

**Abetments and attempts** (s 58):

Any person who aids, abets, counsels or procures the commission of a
military offence, or who attempts to commit a military offence, shall be
liable for the same punishment as for the offence. However, if the
offence is punishable by death, the maximum sentence for an abetment or
attempt shall be imprisonment.

Defences

**Justification, excuse and defence** (s 59):

Rules and principles regarding justifications, excuses and defences as
established in the civil courts are also applicable to any charge under
the SAF Act.

Commonly Asked Questions on Military Law

**Will I be charged in a civil court after being charged in a military
court?**

If you have been charged in a military court, you cannot be charged in a
civil court for the same offence or for an offence arising from the same
facts.

**Can I choose to stand trial in a civil court instead of a military
court?**

As a military charge is not a civil charge, once you have been charged
in a military court you cannot request to be charged in a civil court.

**Will I have a civil criminal record as a result of a military
charge?**

No.

If you have been charged with a military offence under the SAF Act (as
opposed to the Penal Code), the SAF will record the offence internally
but you will not have a criminal record.

**Will I be sent to the detention barracks immediately upon arrest?**

You may be detained in the detention barracks while waiting for the
court martial. The wait in detention may be counted as part of your
subsequent sentence.

**Will a military charge affect my employment or education prospects?**

In general, any military offence may be reflected in your ORD transcript
and will be viewed by potential employers and educational institutions.
Certain universities and employers may also include a request for any
conviction by a court of law including a military court.

**What happens if I can’t pay a fine imposed on me?**

If you default on a fine, you may be detained in the Detention Barracks
for a period of 10 days for a fine of $100 and below, a period of 20
days for a fine between $300 and $100 and a maximum of 40 days for
larger amounts. [316]_

**Can I work while serving in the SAF?**

NSFs can apply to their Commanding Officer for permission to work
outside of military duties provided there are pressing personal
circumstances and that such work does not conflict with military duties.

**Can my items be confiscated during a search?**

Confiscation of items can only take place when you are under arrest.
Only a military policeman who is making an arrest can confiscate your
personal items if there is reason to believe that the items were used in
the offence or are relevant evidence of the offence. Your items may be
detained until your discharge or acquittal. Any other military personnel
are only able to search for and seize offensive weapons.

**Can my parents / relatives / girlfriend visit me in the Detention
Barracks?**

Detained serviceman can only have 1 visit per week from immediate family
members only but there is no limit on the number of visits by legal
counsel or Defending Officers. You may also receive letters, and write 1
letter per week. [317]_

ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
==============================

What Is Alternative Dispute Resolution?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Alternative dispute resolution, or ADR, refers to a range of procedures
for resolving disputes between parties **outside of the traditional
court system**. These include:

+------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **ADR Procedure**            | **Description**                                                                                                                              |
+==============================+==============================================================================================================================================+
| **Arbitration**              | A person or panel selected by the parties decides the dispute after receiving evidence and hearing arguments.                                |
+------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Mediation**                | A neutral person helps the parties find a mutually acceptable resolution of their dispute.                                                   |
+------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Adjudication**             | Commercial use of an adjudicator, who is a neutral third party, to decide issues between parties.                                            |
+------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Neutral Evaluation**       | An expert identifies each side’s strengths and weaknesses and suggests the likely amount of damages, if any, that may be awarded at trial.   |
+------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Settlement Conferences**   | A judge meets with the parties to explore settlement options and encourages them to agree upon a resolution of their dispute.                |
+------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

The various ADR procedures range from non-evaluative, informal methods
such as conciliation and facilitation to more evaluative and formal
mechanisms such as arbitration and neutral evaluation.

Arbitration

Arbitration is a consensual process by which parties submit their
differences to one or more impartial persons, the arbitrator or panel of
arbitrators, for resolution through a final and binding decision.

Below are some of the key features of arbitration:

**Confidentiality:** While similar to court litigation in that
proceedings are adversarial and decisions are binding, arbitration
offers a high degree of confidentiality to parties (the proceedings are
private), more flexibility in terms of rules and procedures used as well
as greater international enforceability of judgements over court
decisions.

Under the New York Convention to which Singapore is a signatory,
arbitral awards have extra-territorial enforceability in over 120
countries.

**Time and cost saving:** Resolving disputes through arbitration instead
of litigation can sometimes save time and money for the parties
involved, as arbitral proceedings can in certain cases be faster and
more cost-efficient.

The characteristics of arbitration make it particularly suited for
commercial disputes, especially where confidentiality is important to
the parties involved. Almost every civil dispute can be referred to
arbitration.

However matters involving moral questions or questions of law cannot be
resolved by arbitration. Matters not referred to arbitration include:

(a) Matrimonial matters, like divorce or maintenance.

(b) Bankruptcy matters, eg. declaring a person as an insolvent.

(c) Criminal offences.

    Mediation

    Mediation is a non-adversarial consensual process in which a neutral
    person, the mediator, helps parties to settle their disputes through
    a conciliatory process of discussion and narrowing differences.

    Parties in mediations make their own decisions, with the help of the
    mediator in shaping the outcome of the dispute. The mediator does
    **not** have the final decision-making power. Should parties fail to
    come to an agreement, they are permitted to walk away from the
    mediation session without a positive outcome. Successful mediation
    depends on the co-operation of all parties in implementing the
    agreed upon solution, since the process (unlike arbitration) is
    non-binding unless the parties agree to be contractually bound by
    the terms of settlement.

    The focus in mediation is on finding a practical solution acceptable
    to all parties that helps to preserve the working relationship on
    all sides.

    Adjudication

    Adjudication is similar to arbitration, although there is a set
    timeframe within which the adjudicator must make a decision and
    parties are responsible for their own costs unless otherwise agreed.
    Decisions made in adjudication, as for arbitration, are binding
    unless these are later overturned by an arbitration or court
    judgment.

    Commonly used in the construction industry to ensure payment and
    resolve other types of disputes, adjudication is aimed at being
    faster and more cost effective than either litigation or
    arbitration.

    In general, the flexible nature of ADR and the various options
    available allows parties to choose the most appropriate way for
    resolving their disputes without unnecessary cost or delay.

    Neutral Evaluation

    This is a structured proceeding, but conducted informally. Both
    parties and their lawyers present their side of the case and key
    evidence to one another and the evaluator, who is a settlement
    judge.

    The evaluator then reviews the case and provides an assessment of
    the merits, which is his best estimate of the parties' likelihood of
    success at trial.

    Neutral evaluation can be used to either settle, or as a basis for
    settlement of negotiations.

    Settlement Conferences

    These are meetings in which a judge or volunteer attorney assists
    opposing parties, to reach a mutually agreeable resolution of their
    dispute without having to proceed to a trial. The judge will
    evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of the case, without making
    any decisions or orders in the case.

    Such a conference may be initiated through either party, or it may
    be ordered by the court as a precedent to holding a trial. Parties
    are usually represented at the settlement conference by their own
    lawyers.

    Alternative Dispute Resolution in Singapore

    The following section provides an overview of various ADR services
    available in Singapore to businesses and individuals.

General Commercial Disputes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**A. Mediation**

**Singapore Mediation Centre (SMC)**

Services provided by the SMC include Mediation, Neutral Evaluation,
Mediation-Arbitration ("Med-Arb") and the Singapore Domain Name dispute
resolution. Online ADR services are also available through the dispute
manager website (see section on online ADR below).

The SMC also administers the Small Case Commercial Mediation Scheme
(SCCMS), which is designed to provide cheap mediation services for cases
where the quantum of a claim is S$60,000 or less. The first two hours of
mediation are free.

Its panel of mediators and neutrals includes leaders from different
professions and industries who have undergone formal mediation training
and rigorous evaluation. SMC also has an international panel of
mediators that parties may choose from.

Fees depend on the quantum in dispute and the seniority and number of
mediators.

The SMC can be found at -

1 Supreme Court Lane, Level 4, Singapore 178879

Tel +65 6332 4366

Fax +65 6333 5085

**Mediation in the State Courts**

State Courts attempt to provide a holistic approach to dispute
resolution, including mediation, in a variety of matters -

1. **Criminal matters** - After the complainant files a summons, a
   notice may be issued for both the complainant and respondent to
   appear for mediation before a Magistrate or in the Community
   Mediation Centre.

2. **Small Claims Tribunals** - Generally, claims less than $10,000 are
   heard here. Parties normally comprise consumer and supplier, and are
   asked to attend a mediation or “consultation” session before a Small
   Claims Tribunals Registrar.

3. **Other civil matters** - Other civil disputes may be referred for
   mediation by the Primary Dispute Resolution Centre (PDRC), please see
   below for further details. The PDRC will only schedule a mediation
   session when all the pleadings – all documents required to commence
   an action or defend a case – have been filed and all the parties
   consent to the mediation.

   If the case is a non-injury motor accident (NIMA) or personal injury
   (PI), a notice to attend Court Dispute Resolution will be sent to
   your lawyer.

   If the case is not NIMA or PI, then either party may apply for
   mediation after obtaining permission of all parties.

4. **Family matters** - Parties involved in divorce proceedings in the
   Family Court may be referred for mediation in the Family Resolutions
   Chambers or the Child Focused Resolution Centre. Mediation is also
   conducted by the Maintenance Mediation Chambers when parties file
   maintenance complaints.

   *What Goes on During Mediation at the PDRC*

   **Ad Hoc Mediation**

   Parties can also arrange, for a fee, an *ad hoc* mediation through
   law firms or various other private service providers. These mediators
   will facilitate discussions between the parties to facilitate
   settlement.

   **B. Arbitration**

   **Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC)**

   SIAC is an arbitral institution that offers a neutral and independent
   venue for parties to resolve their disputes. Its services include
   arbitrator appointment and case administration (including financial
   management, logistical and institutional support) to parties involved
   in commercial disputes, both domestic and international.

   With the exception of criminal and family law matters, almost any
   civil case that can be taken to court can be resolved by arbitration
   at SIAC if the parties agree. Fees charged for arbitration include a
   management fee pegged to the amount in the dispute as well as the
   arbitrator's fee, which depends on the complexity and quantum of the
   dispute as well as the seniority of the arbitrators.

   SIAC has a regional panel and an international panel of arbitrators,
   comprising of legal and industry experts in a broad range of subject
   areas. Parties are also free to appoint their own arbitrators if they
   prefer.

   **Other Arbitration Rules / Ad Hoc Arbitration**

   Parties may also agree to arbitrate in Singapore in *ad hoc*
   arbitrations or under other arbitration rules such as the ICC rules
   or UNCITRAL rules. Where parties do not use an arbitration
   institution to administer the arbitration, they will be responsible
   for organizing the arbitration.

   Where arbitration is conducted in Singapore, the Arbitration Act
   (where all the parties are domestic) and the International
   Arbitration Act (all other arbitrations) will apply.

   **Arbitration For Small Cases**

   **Small Claims Tribunal (SCT)**

   The Small Claims Tribunals was established to provide a quick and
   inexpensive forum for the resolution of small claims between
   consumers and suppliers. Claims brought before the tribunals first go
   through mediation to try to reach a settlement, failing which
   adjudication is used to resolve the dispute.

   Small Claims Tribunal can hear only (i) matters less than $10,000; or
   (ii) matters between $10,000 and $20,000, but only if all parties
   signed a memorandum of consent to have the matter heard at the SCT.

   **Law Society Arbitration Scheme (LSAS)**

   The LSAS offers neutral evaluation and arbitration services under a
   simple procedure designed to achieve a speedy resolution at low cost.

   Arbitrations with a sum in dispute of less than S$60,000 are
   ‘documents-only’ arbitrations without an oral hearing, by default,
   unless parties opt otherwise. Costs are limited to 10% of claim value
   or S$2,000, whichever is higher. A scale for party and party costs
   also applies.

   **Pro Bono Arbitration Scheme (PBAS)**

   This scheme is similarly managed by the Law Society. The PBAS is only
   for disputes of up to $20,000, and arbitrations are conducted on a
   documents-only basis.

   There is a sole arbitrator, who will waive his or her fees for the
   matter.

Industry-Specific ADR Schemes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Construction - BCA-SMC Adjudication Initiative**

The Building and Construction Industry Security of Payment (SOP) Act was
introduced with the objective of facilitating cash flow in the
construction industry by upholding the rights of parties to seek
progress payment for work done, and providing a framework for quick and
low-cost resolution of payment disputes through adjudication. The Act
applies to all parties in the construction industry with written
contracts for the works or the supply of goods or services for
construction projects in Singapore.

The Singapore Mediation Centre (SMC) has been appointed as the
Authorised Nominating Body or ANB under the Act and is tasked with
administering the adjudication process as well as train, certify and
maintain a register of adjudicators.

**Maritime - Singapore Chamber of Maritime Arbitration (SCMA)**

The SCMA offers parties involved in maritime disputes an independent,
efficient and reliable means of resolving their disputes through
arbitration. SCMA has an international panel of experienced arbitrators,
user-friendly arbitration rules and a quantum-based fee structure which
provides certainty of cost. Services provided by SCMA include
appointment of arbitrators and case administration including all
financial, logistical and administrative matters relating to the
arbitration.

**Singapore Institute of Surveyors and Valuers (SISV)**

The SISV Dispute Resolution Centre provides mediation and arbitration
services in respect of real estate and construction disputes. The
mediators on SISV's Panel of Mediators are drawn from its membership.
They comprise practising quantity surveyors, valuers and land surveyors
who are familiar with the kinds of disputes in their respective
industries. Any party to a real estate or construction dispute may
approach the SISV Mediation Centre for its dispute to be resolved
through mediation. Disputes that can be handled by SISV include those
relating to:

-  Construction contracts between developers and contractors,
       contractors and contractors.

-  The development and management of buildings including strata title
       developments.

-  The buying and selling of property and agency related disputes.

-  The surveying field, including those concerning boundary conflicts
       and encroachments.

-  The provision of professional services in the field of development,
       land surveying, construction, project management, contract
       administration, property management, valuation and property
       consultancy and other related services.

-  Other disputes relating to development, planning, construction,
       project management, valuation, property management and
       maintenance issues concerning property and projects.

   **For Disputes Between Law Practices – SCMediate**

   Senior Counsel in private practice (known as the Forum of Senior
   Counsel) have decided to make themselves available to mediate
   disputes between law practices. Under this service, every Senior
   Counsel in private practice will be available, if requested, to act
   as a mediator in any dispute between law practices. The Senior
   Counsel providing this service will not charge where the total time
   spent does not exceed half a day. However, their availability to act
   will be subject to their prior or overriding commitments. All
   communications with Senior Counsel as mediator will be kept
   confidential. Senior Counsel will render their services on the basis
   that they will be exempted from liability in respect of the services
   provided. As with all mediations, Senior Counsel will not have any
   power to make binding decisions.

   Parties may appoint a mutually agreed Senior Counsel of their choice
   as mediator.

   This scheme is different from the Cost Dispute Resolve scheme offered
   by the society for resolving disputes on legal costs.

Consumer Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several organisations in Singapore are involved in encouraging the use
of ADR to resolve customer complaints in specific service areas.

**SG Enable**

SG Enable is an agency dedicated to enabling persons with disabilities.

Key functions of SG Enable include:

-  Enhancing information and referral services for child and adult
   disability schemes.

-  Administering grants and support to persons with disabilities and
   their caregivers.

-  Improving transition management across different life stages.

-  Enhancing employability and employment options for persons with
   disabilities.

-  Rallying stakeholder support in enabling persons with disabilities.

-  SG Enable provides programmes for children, youths and adults. It
   also provides support for caregivers and for work training and
   employment. Schemes for financial assistance and other assistance may
   also be available.

   | **Address:** 141 Redhill Road, Singapore 158828
   | **Tel:** `6593 6437 <tel:+6565936437>`__
   | **Fax:** 6270 7024
   | **Website:** https://www.sgenable.sg
   |

   **Consumers Association of Singapore (CASE) Mediation Centre**

   The CASE Mediation Centre helps settle disputes that often arise
   between businesses and consumers by way of mediation rather than
   through the courts.

   **Financial Industry Disputes Resolution Centre Ltd (FIDReC)**

   The FIDReC is an independent and impartial institution specialising
   in the resolution of disputes between financial institutions and
   consumers. FIDReC subsumes the work of the Consumer Mediation Unit
   (CMU) of the Association of Banks in Singapore and the Insurance
   Disputes Resolution Organisation(IDRO). FIDReC provides an affordable
   and accessible one-stop avenue for consumers to resolve their
   disputes with financial institutions. It handles disputes between
   insureds and insurance companies (up to S$100,000) as well as
   disputes between banks and consumers, capital market disputes and all
   other financial disputes (including third party claims and market
   conduct claims) (up to S$50,000).

   **Law Society’s Cost Dispute Resolve**

   Cost Dispute Resolve provides a simple and expedited arbitration
   procedure for resolving the dispute if mediation is unsuccessful.
   Under this scheme, the rules governing the mediation process and the
   procedures have been kept simple to facilitate access dispute
   resolution.

Social, Community & Relational Disputes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Community Mediation Centres (CMCs)**

The purpose of the CMC is to provide mediation services in social,
community or family disputes that do not involve a seizable offence
(where police are legally empowered to arrest without a warrant).

CMCs handle cases involving conflicts between neighbours, family members
and friends. CMCs cater to community disputes as opposed to commercial
ones. These encompass relational disputes encountered within one's
community and social sphere. Parties to:

-  Neighbourhood disputes

-  Family disputes (excluding family violence)

-  Disagreements with friends

-  Stallholder/owner squabbles and

-  Altercations/arguments between strangers

   can approach the Community Mediation Centres. Staff will evaluate the
   suitability of each case for mediation.

   Apart from direct intake cases, the CMCs also handle Magistrate
   Complaint referrals from the State Courts pursuant to section 15 of
   the CMCs Act. CMCs have also worked with other frontline agencies
   such as family service centres, community centres and the police to
   set up satellite mediation venues at suitable locations near to where
   Singaporeans live and work.

   **Other Mediation and Counselling Centres**

   Mediation work for family and community-related issues is also
   undertaken by non-profit organisations in Singapore. For example, the
   Eagles Mediation and Counselling Centre (EMCC) conducts community
   mediation and counseling programmes for individuals, families, youths
   and organisations.

**Mediation in Family and Divorce Matters, Ministry of Community
Development, Youth and Sports (MCYS)**

Mediation is also used to resolve disputes in the Tribunal of
Maintenance of Parents (TMP) and the Syariah Court under MCYS.

The **TMP** provides a legal avenue for elderly parents to apply for a
maintenance order against their children. When a case is brought to the
TMP, the Tribunal first refers parties to a conciliation officer for
mediation, to try to help them arrive at a settlement.

In the **Syariah Court**, mediation is also used to help married
couples of the Muslim faith in filing for divorce issues such as the
custody of children, division of matrimonial property and other divorce
and ancillary issues. This helps the couple to maintain ties and
continue to communicate after the divorce for the sake of their
children.

THE TRAFFIC COURT
=================

The Traffic Court hears and tries traffic offences. It deals with all
fresh traffic arrest cases, Traffic Police summonses/notices where there
are no offers of composition as well as Land Transport Authority
summonses/notices where there are no offers of composition.

It operates as a mentions court which deals with a wide variety of
applications including applications for bail, remand and adjournments
and is involved in the management of traffic cases. It is also the trial
court for traffic cases.

Traffic offences *without* any offer of composition
---------------------------------------------------

If there is no offer of composition, you are required to attend the
Traffic Court on the date and time stipulated. Once you have been dealt
with by the Traffic Court, you will be given either a fine ticket (blue
in colour) or a Fine Advice Chit by the Court Officer. You can make the
payment at the Finance Section which is located at Level one of the
State Courts, Havelock Square Complex.

Minor traffic offences *with* an offer of composition
-----------------------------------------------------

A traffic offence is considered minor if there is an offer of
composition stated on the traffic ticket or notice. There is an offer of
composition if the ticket or notice states a sum of money which you can
pay to settle the ticket or notice without going to court.

**AXS Stations:** Anyone who receives a traffic ticket or notice from
the Traffic Police Department, Land Transport Authority, Housing and
Development Board or Urban Redevelopment Authority for a minor traffic
offence may use the AXS Station to settle the fine.

If the offer of composition has expired, users can use the Automated
Traffic Offence Management System (ATOMS) to settle their tickets or
notices by pleading guilty to the traffic offence stated in their ticket
or notice and pay a court fine. With ATOMS, users can settle their
traffic tickets at their convenience and there is no need to go to
court.

ATOMS is run on the AXS Stations which are located island-wide. You can
call the AXS Hotline at `6560 2727 <tel:+6565602727>` or visit their website at
http://www.axs.com.sg to find the AXS Station nearest to you.

Please note that the operating hours for the AXS Hotline are:

8.00 am to 10.00 pm daily

(including Sundays and public holidays)


Commonly Asked Questions on the Traffic Court
-------------------------------------------------

**Can I claim legal aid for a traffic offence?**

Yes, it is possible but not guaranteed, as there are rules on
eligibility for free legal aid, depending on the individual lawyer/ law
firm or other organization you approach in regards to your case.

**Should I hire a lawyer, or can I represent myself in Court?**

This depends on whether your traffic offence is a minor or serious one.

Your traffic ticket/notice will indicate whether your traffic offence is
serious or minor. If the ticket specifies an “offer of composition”,
your offence is considered minor. You can pay a “composition” to settle
the ticket/notice without going to court (thus, you do not have to hire
counsel), provided you pay on time.

If there is no offer of composition, your offence is considered serious.
You must attend court on the appointed date. If you plead guilty, the
court will impose a sentence. If you claim trial, a date will be set for
the case to be heard. [318]_

**On what grounds can my licence be suspended/revoked?**

Singapore's demerit points system named the Driver Improvement Points
System (DIPS) was introduced on 1 March 1983. DIPS is designed to
identify and rehabilitate errant drivers through a system of rewards and
punishments. Errant motorists are thus encouraged to improve their
driving behaviours on the roads with incentives to expunge their demerit
points and previous suspension record as well as remission of suspension
period.

For new motorists who are *under one year of probation* from the date of
grant on their dirving licence, the driving licence can be revoked and
become invalid when 13 or more demerit points are accumulated. The
licence holder will have to retake all necessary tests to obtain a
licence again.

For *non-probation motorists*, where they have no previous suspension
record with Traffic Police, and they have accumulated 24 or more demerit
points within 24 consecuive months, their driving licence will become
liable for the 1\ :sup:`st` suspension of 12 weeks. If a motorists has a
previous suspension record with Traffice Police, and they have
accumulated 12 or more demerit points within 12 months, their driving
lience will become liable for the subsequent suspension. For subsequent
suspensions after the 1\ :sup:`st` suspension, the suspension periods
are:

-  2\ :sup:`nd` suspension: 24 weeks

-  3\ :sup:`rd` suspension: 1 year

-  4\ :sup:`th` suspension: 2 years

-  5\ :sup:`th` suspension (onwards): 3 years

Where the suspension period lasts a year or longer (ie. 3\ :sup:`rd`
suspension and onwards), the driving licence will be revoked and become
invalid. The licence holder will have to retake all the necessary
driving tests (theory and practical) to obtain a licence to drive/ride
again.

Motorists liable for 1\ :sup:`st` and 2\ :sup:`nd` suspension will offer
a retraining course to correct their driving beaviours. If they take and
pass the retraining course, their suspension period will be given a
remission. For 1st suspension, the suspension period will be reduced
from 12 weeks to 4 weeks. If none of their traffic offences leading to
their 1st suspension was involved in traffic accident, their suspension
period will be further reduced to 1 week; and for 2nd suspension, it
will be reduced from 24 weeks to 12 weeks.

There is no offer of retraining course and remission for 3rd and
subsequent suspensions.

**What are the offences listed under DIPS?**

Under the DIPS, demerit points are given from a list of scheduled
offences under the Road Traffic (DIPS) Rules.

 

**LIST OF SCHEDULED OFFENCES UNDER DIPS**\  [319]_

+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| *S/N*   | *Offences committed*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | *Demerit points*   |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 1       | Carrying excess pillion or carrying pillion sitting not astride                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 2       | Rider failing to wear or wear insecurely on his head a protective helmet                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 3       | Disobeying traffic direction of police officer, employee of Authority or security officer engaged in regulating traffic                                                                                                                                                                             | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 4       | Conveying load not properly secured                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 5       | Using tyres with ply or cord carcass exposed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 6       | Driver failing to wear seat belt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 7       | Parking abreast of another vehicle                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 8       | Parking within a pedestrian crossing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 9       | Stopping in a zebra controlled (or more commonly known as zebra crossing) area                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 10      | Driver failing to ensure that every passenger wears a seat belt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 11      | Using a motor vehicle where a person below 1.35 metres in height is a passenger and is not properly secured by an approved child restraint or a body-restraining seat belt                                                                                                                          | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 12      | Parking within a Demerit Points No Parking Zone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 13      | Stopping within a Demerit Points No Stopping Zone                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 14      | Failing to fill up every passenger seat in driver’s cabin, or any additional cabin or enclosed space provided for the carriage of passengers or goods and which is adjacent to or is an extension of the cabin for the driver, before carrying any person on the floor of open deck goods vehicle   | 3                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Fine : Light Vehicle: $120 /  Heavy Vehicle : $150**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 15      | Exceeding speed limit for vehicle by 1 to 20 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 16      | Exceeding speed limit on a road by 1 to 20 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 17      | Failing to give way to oncoming traffic at controlled junction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 18      | Failing to give way at uncontrolled junction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 19      | Failing to give way at junction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 20      | Failing to give way at roundabout                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 21      | Crossing double white lines                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 22      | Crossing road divider                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 23      | Obstructing flow of traffic                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 24      | Forming up incorrectly when turning left or right                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 25      | Failing to give way to ambulance, fire brigade or police vehicle                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 26      | Driving while carrying load on a motor vehicle in a dangerous manner                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 27      | Stopping on the shoulder or verge of an expressway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 28      | Stopping or remaining at rest on the carriage way of expressway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 4                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Fine : Light Vehicle: $130 /  Heavy Vehicle : $160**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 29      | Exceeding speed limit for vehicle by 21 to 30 kilometre per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 30      | Exceeding speed limit on a road by 21 to 30 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 31      | Driving on the shoulder of an expressway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 32      | Failing to securely tie or attach goods to a goods vehicle to prevent their falling off from the vehicle                                                                                                                                                                                            | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 33      | Offences committed by motorists at pedestrian crossing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 34      | Driving or riding against the flow of traffic as indicated by traffic signs                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 35      | Careless driving                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 36      | Carrying passengers on a motor vehicle or trailer in a dangerous manner                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 37      | Reversing unnecessarily along an expressway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 38      | Failing to obey 1.1 metre height restriction for persons carried on open deck goods vehicle                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 39      | Carrying passengers when the clear floor space of the open deck of goods vehicle available for each passenger is insufficient                                                                                                                                                                       | 6                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Fine : Light Vehicle: $150 /  Heavy Vehicle : $180**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 40      | Exceeding speed limit for vehicle by 31 to 40 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 8                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 41      | Exceeding speed limit on a road by 31 to 40 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 8                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Fine : Light Vehicle: $170 /  Heavy Vehicle : $200**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 42      | Driving without due care or reasonable consideration for other road users                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 9                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 43      | Carrying passengers on a goods vehicle in a dangerous manner                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 9                  |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Fine : Light Vehicle: $170 /  Heavy Vehicle : $200**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 44      | Exceeding speed limit for vehicle by 41 to 50 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 12                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 45      | Exceeding speed limit on a road by 41 to 50 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 12                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Offender will be prosecuted in court**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 46      | Failing to conform to traffic light signals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | 12                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Fine : Light Vehicle: $200 /  Heavy Vehicle : $230**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 47      | Use of mobile telephone while driving                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 12                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **1st offence: Fine not exceeding $1000 or jail up to 6 months or both**\  \ **2nd and subsequent offence: Fine not exceeding $2000 or jail up to 12 months or both**                                                                                                                               |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 48      | Exceeding speed limit for vehicle by 51 to 60 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 18                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 49      | Exceeding speed limit on a road by 51 to 60 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 18                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Offender will be prosecuted in court**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 50      | Exceeding speed limit for vehicle by more than 60 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | 24                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 51      | Exceeding speed limit on a road by more than 60 kilometres per hour                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 24                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
| 52      | Reckless or dangerous driving                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 24                 |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+
|         | **Offender will be prosecuted in court**                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                    |
+---------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+--------------------+

** **

**What do I do if issued with a warrant of arrest?**

If you have settled all your traffic summonses, and would like to find
out why there is a warrant of arrest issued against you, you can send an
email to: SPF\_TP\_Summons\_Processing@spf.gov.sg or call (65) 6 547
0000 to check.

*Warrants are typically issued when a person fails to appear in court or
is being sought on criminal charges.* It is best to consult a criminal
lawyer for advice on how to possibly avoid being locked up, and not less
importantly, to prepare for your defense.

The Warrant will be handed over to the Warrant Enforcement Unit (a
division of the Singapore Police Force) or the respective enforcement
agencies for them to execute. The police will either arrest you or you
may be asked to surrender yourself at the Warrant Enforcement Unit for
the warrant to be executed.

As a condition of the Warrant of Arrest, bail may or may not be offered
upon arrest. If no bail is offered, you will be brought to Court within
48 hours of your arrest; if bail is offered, you will be asked to
furnish the bail sum before you may be released to attend Court on a
specified date. If you are unable to find a bailor, you will be brought
to Court within 48 hours of your arrest. In certain cases, you may be
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence pending your
arrest.

**How can I get a charge withdrawn?**

If you in fact committed the offence charged against you, there is no
way that the charge can be withdrawn completely. However, if you feel
that you did not commit the offence, or that the summons was not
justifiable, you may make an appeal by writing to the Traffic Police or
LTA. [320]_

**Traffic Police appeals**

Write to: Chief Investigation Officer Violation Reports Investigation
Branch, Traffic Police Department, 10 Ubi Avenue 3, Singapore 408865 

Email:
`*SPF\_TP\_Summons\_Processing@spf.gov.sg* <mailto:SPF_TP_Summons_Processing@spf.gov.sg>`__

**LTA appeals**

Write to:
`*https://vrl.lta.gov.sg/lta/vrl/action/pubfunc?ID=AddAppeal* <https://vrl.lta.gov.sg/lta/vrl/action/pubfunc?ID=AddAppeal>`__

**Can the number of charges against me be reduced?**

If you think you have a good reason for committing the offence, you can
try to mitigate the offence. Use an `*AXS
station* <http://www.axs.com.sg/axsStation_locations.php>`__ and answer
“Yes” when asked if you want to mitigate the offence. You will be
required to attend a court hearing and explain your reasons to the
judge. [321]_

Commonly Asked Questions on Handphone Driving [322]_

For the offence of handphone driving to stand, **ALL** the following 3
conditions must be fulfilled:

    (1) The vehicle is in motion

    (2) The driver is holding on to the handphone with one hand; while
    his other hand is holding the steering wheel

    (3) The driver is communicating with any person with that handphone

**Note:** If the driver is not holding on to the steering wheel at all,
he can be charged for reckless or dangerous driving. Upon conviction,
first-time offenders can be fined up to S$3000/-, or jailed for a term
up to 12 months, or both. Repeat offenders are liable for a maximum fine
of S$5000/-, or to imprisonment for a term up to 2 years, or both. In
addition, they may also be disqualified from holding or obtaining a
driving licence. This includes making phone calls, paging someone,
receiving a call by pressing the keypad, and reading, writing or sending
an SMS.

**Purpose of the rules:** The purpose of setting the three conditions is
to ensure that drivers who have no intention to commit handphone driving
will not be caught by ambiguous rules. For example, a driver who simply
holds a mobile phone but is not using it to communicate while driving
will not have committed the offence. However, if by doing so, the driver
loses attention on the roads and fails to maintain proper control of his
vehicle, he will still have committed an offence of driving without due
care or reasonable consideration.

Similarly, the spirit of the law is such that the driver who uses his
handphone is only a menace to other road users if his vehicle is moving.
Hence, drivers who use their handphones while their vehicles are
stationary will not be caught.

In short, Traffic Police do not take action against motorists for
handphone driving simply because there is a handphone on the passenger
seat or beside the driver. Traffic Police will only take action when our
observations show that all the three conditions for the offence of
handphone driving are concurrently present.

All handphone driving offenders will be prosecuted in court, regardless
of whether the motorist is a first-timer or repeat offender. A
first-timer convicted of phone and drive offence shall be liable to 12
demerit points and a maximum fine of up to $1000/- or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 6 months or both. He/She may also be
disqualified from driving. The offender's handphone and SIM card will be
seized to facilitate investigation. These may be forfeited by the court
upon conviction.

**Common Scenarios:**

**Scenario A (Paging for someone):** Page for someone, with or without
earpiece, using one hand to hold on to the mobile phone while driving.

**Scenario B (SMS/MMS message):** Writing, Sending, and Reading SMS/MMS
messages from someone, with or without earpiece, using one hand to hold
on to the mobile phone while driving.

**Scenario C (Making a Call):** Making a call, with or without earpiece,
by pressing the keypads and was holding handphone in one hand while
driving.

**Scenario D (Receiving a Call):** Receiving a call, with or without
earpiece, by pressing the keypads and was holding handphone in one hand
while driving.

.. [289]
   Ministry of Defence (“MINDEF”), *Cyber Pioneer: Military justice
   system treats all fairly and equally* (25 January 2008), available at
   http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/resourcelibrary/cyberpioneer/topics/articles/news/2008/January/25jan08\_news.html,
   last accessed on 17 June 2014

.. [290]
   Ibid

.. [291]
   Ibid

.. [292]
   Ibid

.. [293]
   Ibid

.. [294]
   Ibid

.. [295]
   Singapore Armed Forces (“SAF”) Act (Cap. 295) s 76

.. [296]
   MINDEF, *Cyber Pioneer: Military justice system treats all fairly and
   equally* (25 January 2008), available at
   http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/resourcelibrary/cyberpioneer/topics/articles/news/2008/January/25jan08\_news.html,
   last accessed on 17 June 2014

.. [297]
   Ibid

.. [298]
   Ibid

.. [299]
   SAF Act (Cap. 295) s 77(1)

.. [300]
   SAF Act (Cap. 295) s 77(3)

.. [301]
   MINDEF, *Cyber Pioneer: Military justice system treats all fairly and
   equally* (25 January 2008), available at
   http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/resourcelibrary/cyberpioneer/topics/articles/news/2008/January/25jan08\_news.html,
   last accessed on 17 June 2014

.. [302]
   Ibid

.. [303]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) s 62(4)

.. [304]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) s 2(1)

.. [305]
   Ibid

.. [306]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) s 62(3)

.. [307]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) s 2(1)

.. [308]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) ss 130, 182B

.. [309]
   Criminal Procedure Code (Cap 68) s 104(1)

.. [310]
   Criminal Procedure Code (Cap 68) s 104(2)

.. [311]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) s 182C

.. [312]
   Constitution of the Republic of Singapore, Art. 9(3)

.. [313]
   Jasbir Singh v PP [1994] 1 SLR(R) 782; James Raj s/o Arokiasamy v PP
   [2014] SGHC 10

.. [314]
   Ibid

.. [315]
   *See* Law Gazette, *Plea in Mitigation*, available at
   http://www.lawgazette.com.sg/2006-1/Jan06-feature2.htm, last accessed
   on 19 June 2014

.. [316]
   SAF Act (Cap 295) s 71

.. [317]
   SAF Military Police Command, *FAQs: SAF Detention Barracks*,
   available at
   http://www.mindef.gov.sg/imindef/mindef\_websites/atozlistings/safmpc/faqs.html,
   last accessed on 19 June 2014

.. [318]
   http://www.ecitizen.gov.sg/topics/pages/mobile/topicsdetail.aspx?mpageId=195,
   last accessed 1 September 2014

.. [319]
   http://driving-in-singapore.spf.gov.sg/services/driving_in_singapore/services/dips.html

.. [320]
   http://www.ecitizen.gov.sg/topics/pages/mobile/topicsdetail.aspx?mpageId=195#sthash.ZnwU6pyi.dpuf

.. [321]
   http://www.ecitizen.gov.sg/topics/pages/mobile/topicsdetail.aspx?mpageId=195

.. [322]
   This section is extracted from Singapore Police Force website on July
   2014
